MUDI 2000

A group project completed in spring 2017 as part of Microprocessor Systems Module

Brief overview:
Controller with 30 programmable buttons - used to play whatever kind of music/sounds/general racket you can imagine. Arduino polls buttons and sends pre-determined MIDI messages to computer. Computer then plays desired sounds. Huge amount of flexibility, software on computer side can be used to play whatever sounds are desired, through any number of instruments and effects.

More detailed overview:
MUDI 2000 is an Aruino UNO based MIDI controller, similar in function and appearance to a Novation Launchpad, only on a smaller scale and sadly without the light show. 
The controller connects to a computer for power and to send MIDI messages - on it's own it has no way of producing sound. It sends the computer MIDI note on and note off messages, with information on the pitch of the note (high or low), the volume and the channel. The pitch, volume and channel serve to identify the note. If no note off message follows a note on message the computer software will sustain the note. Channels are used to allow easy separation of instruments on the computer e.g. having a column of buttons for percussion, another for bass guitar etc. 
Even though we were sending MIDI messages, we wanted to use a standard USB cable from the Arduino to the computer, rather than wiring a separate MIDI female port to the Arduino and using a MIDI to USB cable, as well as the USB cable to power the Arduino. As such, we used a program called Hairless MIDI serial bridge to map our USB port to a virtual MIDI port. Hairless MIDI allowed effective debugging as it displayed the serial data the Arduino was outputting through the USB.
We used Reaper as our Digital Audio Workstation to receive input from this virtual MIDI port and to actually play sounds and do something with the input from the controller. Different instruments can be used for different channels such as guitar, drums - if you can name it you can play it.
We also mapped the lower 5 buttons of the controller to control functions within Reaper (begin looping play/pause etc). These are all on their own channel to avoid interfering with any actual note playing.

